---
layout: post-full
author: Chris Sunny Thaliyath
type: youtube
yt-video-id: Ivk2ZBe-404
homedisplay: iframe
title: PS$ controller + Xbee + Arduino 
homedisplay: iframe
tags: [video, iframe]
category: [video]
gallery:
    - images:
      - filename: tractor.jpg
        alttext: Bloom Flat
      - filename: pca9685.png
        alttext: PCA9685 nano
     
---


In this tutorial, I’ll show you how to control an Arduino-based robot  via the official PS4 Bluetooth-based DualShock joystick controller by using USB host, Arduino, and a USB Bluetooth Dongle. Before diving into this project, collect the necessary hardware.
image
Collect the Hardware

    Arduino Pro Mini
    PS4 Bluetooth Controller
    USB Host Shield Mini
    FT232RL
    Arduino Robot Kit
    

image

The necessary hardware.
## Arduino Pro Mini

If we talk about Arduino Mini, it’s basically an Arduino controller without the programming chip installed on it. The reason why Arduino removed the programming chip is simply to reduce the size and cost of PRO Mini. Also once you have one programming device, it can then be reused for other PRO Mini projects, which is quite common.
image

Arduino Pro Mini


## What is USB host?

USB Host is an adapter for USB devices. You can use it to connect an Arduino board to a USB device, such as a USB joystick, a mouse, or a thumb drive. 

For example, you can control your Arduino robot with your own USB based joystick gamepad. We can connect any USB slave device easily with an Arduino microcontroller such as a USB mouse, USB keyboard, USB printer, USB mass storage, and more.

The USB Host might need analog/digital converters necessary to develop a full-speed USB peripheral/host controller with Arduino microcontroller.  
image

The USB host shield.
Features

    USB 2.0 Full Speed compatible
    3.3/5V operation level compatible
    All GPIOx pins break-out
    USB Host 5V/500mA supply for USB protocol

Specifications 

    Operating Voltage: 5V/3V
    Max Current: 500mA only when Arduino is connected with a good power supply
    Max Current: 400mA only when Arduino is powered from its USB port
    USB Controller: MAX3421E

To get this project working, you will need the USB Host Shield for the Arduino and a Bluetooth dongle. I used the USB host shield from Arduino but it’s now discontinued. You can utilize Sparkfun’s USB shield instead.

The USB shield is necessary because we need to connect a Bluetooth based PS4 Controller to the Arduino, which doesn’t have a Bluetooth receiver. Then you can use the included library to pair with the Bluetooth based PS4 controller. And once the Bluetooth connection is established with the PS4 controller, we can use simple functions to read the state of the device.

Also, all of the code is open source. If you want to experiment more with the USB Host by yourself, [Kristian]’s work could be helpful to get started. All of the source code is available on Github. The example sketch also shows how easy it is to add a PS4 controller into your own Arduino project. For this project, we will be adapting this code for controlling the motor of an Arduino Robot car using the left joystick of a PS4 controller.
Assembling the Hardware

If you are using a different version of Arduino, then you can simply follow the pinout below for wiring it to your own Arduino board. 
image

The pinout for wiring your Arduino.

if you have an Arduino Pro Mini, assemble the hardware as shown in the image below. Solder the female headers to your USB host, male headers for Arduino Pro Mini and assemble the Arduino micro board at the top of the USB host shield into their female headers.
image

The Arduino Pro Mini and USB host shield.
image

 <iframe width="420" height="315"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/FCfDlQEcGVw&t=3s">
</iframe> 




Another angle of the connected Arduino Pro Mini and USB host shield.

After assembling the USB Host Shield with Arduino Mini, add the connections for the L298N motor driver module, by following this Fritzing diagram:
image

The Fritzing diagram

If you are not using an Arduino Mini or not utilizing the shield setup, these are the connections you need to the USB host:
image

Fritzing diagram if you are not using an Arduino Mini or the shield setup.
image

The properly connected hardware.
Upload Source code

The following connections will be used for uploading the source code:
Arduino Pro --> FTDI

    GND --> GND
    CTS --> GND
    VCC --> VCC
    TXD --> RXD
    RXD --> TXD
    DTR --> DTR

image

Or you can simply add a female header to the Arduino Pro Mini and plug the FTDI module into the female headers as I did in the image below.
image
image
image

Upload the source code to your Arduino Pro Mini with the following steps. You can find the full source code at the bottom of this page.
image
image
image
image
image

After uploading the source code just insert the Bluetooth dongle into the USB host shield and start pairing with your PS4 controller.
image

Attach the dongle to you completed build.
Pairing the PS4 Controller

In order to pair the Bluetooth based PS4 controller with Arduino. Set the gamepad controller into pairing mode by pressing and holding the “PlayStation button” and ”Share button” at the same time. Hold these two buttons until the light on the PS4 controller starts flashing rapidly. Now the Arduino should automatically detect your PS4 controller.

Once the PS4 controller is connected with your Arduino robot, the controller’s light will turn blue.
image

When pairing is complete, the light will turn blue!
image

The completed build.

### Code for trsnsmiting PS* data over XBEE

            
        #include <EasyTransfer.h>
        #include <PS4BT.h>
        //#include <PS4USB.h>
        USB Usb;
        BTD Btd(&Usb);

        EasyTransfer ET;

        PS4BT PS4(&Btd,PAIR);
        //PS4USB PS4(&Usb);
        struct SEND_DATA_STRUCTURE{
        
        int count;
        int left;
        int right;
        
        
        };

        #define TX_INTERVAL 5
        #define RX_TIMEOUT 100
        #define STATUS_BLINKRATE 250

        //data group
        SEND_DATA_STRUCTURE txdata;

        void setup(){
        
        
        Serial.begin(115200);
        
        if (Usb.Init() == -1) {
            Serial.print(F("\r\nOSC did not start"));
            while(1); //halt
        }
        Serial.print(F("\r\nPS4 Bluetooth Library Started"));
        
        ET.begin(details(txdata), &Serial);
        
        
        }

        void loop(){
        
        Usb.Task();
        
        if(PS4.connected() )
        { 
        calcPS4Input();
        }

        else{
            txdata.count = 0;
            txdata.left=0;
            txdata.right =0;

            sendData();
            }
        
        }

        long l2, r2;
        double old_tx;
        double old_rx;
        double old_blink;

        void sendData(){
        if(millis()>=(old_tx+TX_INTERVAL)){
            
            ET.sendData();
            old_tx=millis();
        }
        }
        int counter = 0;
        void calcPS4Input(){
        if (PS4.getButtonPress(L2) || PS4.getButtonPress(R2) || PS4.getButtonClick(L1)|| PS4.getButtonClick(R1)|| PS4.getButtonClick(L2)|| PS4.getButtonClick(R2)){
            bool l1_press = PS4.getButtonPress(L1);
        txdata.count=0;
            l2=PS4.getAnalogButton(L2);
            if(l1_press)
            txdata.left= (-1*(l2));
            else
            txdata.left= ((l2));
        
        
        
            bool r2_press = PS4.getButtonPress(R1);
            
            r2=PS4.getAnalogButton(R2);
            if(r2_press)
            txdata.right= (-1*(r2));
            else
            txdata.right= (r2);

            
            sendData();
        

        }
        else if (++counter >10){
        txdata.count =0;
        txdata.left=0;
        txdata.right=0;
        sendData();
        counter =0;
        }
        
        if (PS4.getAnalogHat(LeftHatX) > 137 || PS4.getAnalogHat(LeftHatX) < 117 || PS4.getAnalogHat(LeftHatY) > 137 || PS4.getAnalogHat(LeftHatY) < 117 ){
            txdata.count=1;
            txdata.left= (PS4.getAnalogHat(LeftHatX));
            txdata.right= (PS4.getAnalogHat(LeftHatY));
            sendData();
            
            
        }
        

        if (PS4.getAnalogHat(RightHatX) > 137 || PS4.getAnalogHat(RightHatX) < 117 || PS4.getAnalogHat(RightHatY) > 137 || PS4.getAnalogHat(RightHatY) < 117){
            
            txdata.count=2;
            txdata.left= (PS4.getAnalogHat(RightHatX));
            txdata.right= (PS4.getAnalogHat(RightHatY));
            sendData();
        }
        
        if(PS4.getButtonPress(UP)||PS4.getButtonPress(DOWN)){
            txdata.count=3;
            txdata.left= (PS4.getButtonPress(UP));
            txdata.right= (PS4.getButtonPress(DOWN));
            sendData();
            }

        if(PS4.getButtonPress(LEFT)||PS4.getButtonPress(RIGHT)){
            txdata.count=4;
            txdata.left= (PS4.getButtonPress(LEFT));
            txdata.right= (PS4.getButtonPress(RIGHT));
            sendData();
            }
        
        if(PS4.getButtonPress(CROSS)||PS4.getButtonPress(SQUARE)){
            
            txdata.count=5;
            txdata.left= (PS4.getButtonPress(SQUARE));
            txdata.right=(PS4.getButtonPress(CROSS));
            sendData();
            }
        
        if (PS4.getButtonPress(TRIANGLE)||PS4.getButtonPress(CIRCLE)){
            txdata.count=6;
            txdata.left= (PS4.getButtonPress(CIRCLE));
            txdata.right=(PS4.getButtonPress(TRIANGLE));
            sendData();
            }
        
        
        }
    

## Code for reciving the data and actuating servo motors



       

            #include <EasyTransfer.h>
            #include <SoftwareSerial.h>
            #include <Servo.h>

            #include <Wire.h>
            #include <Adafruit_PWMServoDriver.h>

            #define SERVOMIN  150  // Minimum pulse length count out of 4096.
            #define SERVOMAX  700 // Maximum pulse length count out of 4096.
            int servoNo = 0; // Defines a counter for servos.
            Adafruit_PWMServoDriver pwm = Adafruit_PWMServoDriver();   // Initiates library.


            SoftwareSerial mySerial(2, 3); // RX, TX

            //create object
            EasyTransfer ET;

            int const ledpin = 13;
            int val;

            bool Triangle = false ;
            int last_press ;
            bool Square = false;
            bool Cross = false;
            bool Circle = false;

            int left_drive;
            int right_drive;

            int lift_actuator = 0;
            int tilt_actuator = 7;

            int boom_lift = 8;
            int swing_actuator = 15;
            int bucket_actuator = 4;
            int dipper_actuator = 5;

            int starter = 12;
            int stopper = 13;

            //data group
            struct RECEIVE_DATA_STRUCTURE{

            int count;
            int left;
            int right;
            
            
            };

            RECEIVE_DATA_STRUCTURE txdata;



            void setup(){
            
            Serial.begin(115200);
            
            mySerial.begin(115200);
            ET.begin(details(txdata), &mySerial); //start library
            Serial.print("Module Started");
            pwm.begin();         // Sends PWM signals.
            pwm.setPWMFreq(60);  // Makes servos run at 60 Hz rate.
            delay(20);


            }


            void loop(){
            
            
            if(ET.receiveData()){ //check for incoming data

                
                Serial.println(txdata.count);
                Serial.println(txdata.left);
                Serial.println(txdata.right);
                Serial.println(Triangle);

                switch(txdata.count){
                
                case 0:
                    
                    
                    
                    //delay(300);
                    //left_drive.write(map(txdata.left, -255, 255, 0, 255)); 
                    //right_drive.write(map(txdata.right, -255, 255, 0, 255)); 
                    break;
                case 1:
                
                    if (Triangle){
                    pwm.setPWM(boom_lift, 0, map(txdata.right, 0, 255, SERVOMIN, SERVOMAX));
                    
                    //dipper_actuator.write(map(txdata.left, -255, 255, 0, 255)); 
                    
                    }

                    else
                    pwm.setPWM(swing_actuator, 0, map(txdata.right, 0, 255, SERVOMIN, SERVOMAX));
                    break;
                case 2:
                
                    if (Triangle){
                    
                    pwm.setPWM(lift_actuator, 0, map(txdata.left, 0, 255, SERVOMIN, SERVOMAX));
                    //bucket_actuator.write(map(txdata.right, -255, 255, 0, 255)); 
                    }
                    else
                        pwm.setPWM(tilt_actuator, 0, map(txdata.right, 0, 255, SERVOMIN, SERVOMAX));
                    break;
                case 5:
                    if (txdata.left)
                        Square = !Square;
                    if (txdata.right)
                        Cross = !Cross;

                        if (Cross)
                        // digitalWrite(HIGH , starter);
                        break;
                case 6:
                    if (txdata.left)
                        Circle = !Circle;
                        if (Circle)
                        digitalWrite(HIGH , stopper);
                    if (txdata.right )
                        Triangle = !Triangle;
                    //last_press = txdata.right;  
                    break;
                    default:
                    Serial.println();
                    break;
                    
                }   
            
            }
            
            }

PS3_standalone_BT

This is the code to work on without the xbee connection .

here also you can make similar changes to switch from BT to USB .

    BT is by default *

PS3_easy_transfer || PS4_easy_transfer

Tested with

    Arduino Uno
    USB HostShield
    Xbee Shield

For USB connection

    USB Usb;
    //PS3USB PS3(&Usb);
    BTD Btd(&Usb);
    PS3BT PS3(&Btd);

For BlueTooth connection

    USB Usb;
    PS3USB PS3(&Usb);
    //BTD Btd(&Usb);
    //PS3BT PS3(&Btd);

carCode(for the tractor)

This is the code for recieving the decoding the data thats coming from xbee (via serial)

I have attached the image of a JCB for better clarity.

Tractor drive (differential drive )

all controlled using L1, L2 & R1, R2

left_drive
right_drive

attachments

##When Square is pressed

left and right hat

lift_actuator
tilt_actuator

When triangle is pressed

left and right hat

boom_lift
swing_actuator
bucket_actuator

UP , DOWN , LEFT , RIGHT
Wiring

Host Shield     Teensy          Teensy++
-----------     ------          --------
SS              10              10
INT             9               9
MOSI            2               22
MISO            3               23
SCK             1               21
Reset           Vcc             Vcc
+3.3V           Vcc (MCP1825)   Vcc  (must use MCP1825)
GND             GND             GND


``` liquid
{% raw  %}

{% endraw %}
```

{% include gallery_lightbox.html %}